DOCS: Add computer and code setup how-tos (#4216)
aiidateam/aiida-core: docs/source/howto/run_codes.rst

Throughout the process you will be prompted for information on the computer and code.
In these prompts:

 * Type ``?`` followed by ``<enter>`` to get help on what is being asked at any prompt.
 * Press ``<CTRL>+C`` at any moment to abort the setup process.
   Your AiiDA database will remain unmodified.

.. note::

  The ``verdi`` commands use ``readline`` extensions to provide default answers, which require an advanced terminal.
  Use a standard terminal -- terminals embedded in some text editors (such as ``emacs``) have been known to cause problems.

.. _how-to:run-codes:computer:

How to set up a computer
========================

A |Computer| in AiiDA denotes a computational resource on which you will run your calculations.
It can either be:

 1. the machine where AiiDA is installed or
 2. any machine that is accessible via `SSH <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Shell>`_ from the machine where AiiDA is installed.

The second option allows managing multiple remote compute resources (including HPC clusters and cloud services) from the same AiiDA installation and moving computational jobs between them.

> .. tip::

Reviewer: feels more like a `.. note::` to me

> .. tip::

Author: ```suggestion
.. note::
```

>     The second option requires access through a SSH keypair.

Author: ```suggestion
    The second option requires access through an SSH keypair.
```

    If your compute resource demands two-factor authentication, you may need to install AiiDA directly on the compute resource instead.

Computer requirements
---------------------

> Requirements for configuring a compute resource in AiiDA are:
> 
> * It runs a Unix-like operating system (Linux distros and MacOS should work fine)
> * It has ``bash`` installed
> * (option 2.) It is accessible *via* SSH from the machine that runs AiiDA (possibly :ref:`via a proxy server<how-to:ssh:proxy>`)
> * (optional) It has batch scheduler installed (see the :ref:`list of supported schedulers <topics:schedulers>`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compute resources that can be used by AiiDA to run calculation come in two types:

1. The computer on which AiiDA itself is installed, i.e., the `localhost`
2. Remote computers that can be accessed over SSH (possibly :ref:`via a proxy server<how-to:ssh:proxy>`)

Regardless of the type, each computer must satisfy the following requirements:

* It runs a Unix-like operating system (Linux distros and MacOS should work fine)
* It has ``bash`` installed
* (optional) It has batch scheduler installed (see the :ref:`list of supported schedulers <topics:schedulers>`)
```

If you are configuring a remote computer, start by :ref:`configuring password-less SSH access <how-to:ssh>` to it.

.. note::

    AiiDA will use ``bash`` on the remote computer, regardless of the default shell.
    Please ensure that your remote ``bash`` configuration does not load a different shell.

.. _how-to:run-codes:computer:setup:

Computer setup
--------------

> The configuration of computers happens in two steps: setting up the public metadata asociated with the |Computer| in AiiDA provenance graphs, and configuring private connection details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration of computers happens in two steps: setting up the public metadata associated with the |Computer| in AiiDA provenance graphs, and configuring private connection details.
```

Start by creating a new computer instance in the database:

.. code-block:: console

   $ verdi computer setup

At the end, the command will open your default editor on a file containing a summary of the configuration up to this point.
You can add ``bash`` commands that will be executed

 * *before* the actual execution of the job (under 'Pre-execution script'), and
 * *after* the script submission (under 'Post execution script').

Use these additional lines to perform any further set up of the environment on the computer, for example loading modules or exporting environment variables:

.. code-block:: bash

   export NEWVAR=1
   source some/file

.. note::

   Don't specify settings here that are specific to a code or calculation: you can set further pre-execution commands at the ``Code`` and even ``CalcJob`` level.

> When you are done editing, save and quit (e.g. ``<ESC>:wq<ENTER>`` in ``vim``).

Reviewer: >(e.g. ``<ESC>:wq<ENTER>`` in ``vim``) 

Do we really need these editor-specific details?

Author: I guess some people may not have experience using text editors via the terminal, in which case it may be difficult to work out what to when this file is opened without any guidance?

Reviewer 2: I would be fine with removing them.

The computer has now been created in the database but you still need to *configure* access to it using your credentials.

.. tip::

>     In order to avoid having to retype the setup information the next time round, you can provide some (or all) of the information via a configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In order to avoid having to retype the setup information the next time around, you can provide some (or all) of the information via a configuration file:
```

    .. code-block:: console

       $ verdi computer setup --config computer.yml

    where ``computer.yml`` is a configuration file in the `YAML format <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML#Syntax>`__.

>     This file contains the information in a series of key:value pairs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This file contains the information in a series of key-value pairs:
```

    .. code-block:: yaml

       ---
       label: "localhost"
       hostname: "localhost"
       transport: local
       scheduler: "direct"
       work_dir: "/home/max/.aiida_run"
       mpirun_command: "mpirun -np {tot_num_mpiprocs}"
       mpiprocs_per_machine: "2"
       prepend_text: |
          module load mymodule
          export NEWVAR=1

   The list of the keys for the ``yaml`` file is given by the options of the ``computer setup`` command:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ verdi computer setup --help

>    Note: Remove the ``--`` prefix and replace ``-`` within the keys by the underscore ``_``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Note: remove the ``--`` prefix and replace ``-`` within the keys with an underscore ``_``.
```

.. _how-to:run-codes:computer:configuration:

Computer configuration
----------------------

The second step configures private connection details using:

.. code-block:: console

>    $ verdi computer configure TRANSPORTTYPE COMPUTERNAME

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   $ verdi computer configure TRANSPORTTYPE COMPUTERLABEL
```

Reviewer 2: Just for me to know: is computer "name" finally deprecated?
If yes, I'll replace the other instances of it in the docs/code...

Reviewer: Yeah, to my surprise it is still there for `Computer`, however, for `Code` everything has already been renamed from `name` to `label` for consistency. We should do the same for computers. Found the issue: #2926  I brought this up during the alpha and beta versions of 1.0 and we decided to push this to 2.0. So I guess it would still be okay to use name for computers, but since the CLI uses label (so the config file also has `label` as a key) I think it would already be better to start moving this to label.

> with the appropriate transport type (``local`` for option 1., ``ssh`` for option 2.) and computer label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace ``COMPUTERLABEL`` with the computer label chosen during the setup and replace ``TRANSPORTTYPE`` with the name of chosen transport type, i.e., ``local`` for the localhost computer and ``ssh`` for any remote computer.
```

> After setup and configuration have been completed, let AiiDA check if everything is working properly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the setup and configuration have been completed, let's check that everything is working properly:
```

.. code-block:: console

   $ verdi computer test COMPUTERNAME

> This will test logging in, copying files, and checking the jobs in the scheduler queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command will perform various tests to make sure that AiiDA can connect to the computer, create new files in the scratch directory, retrieve files and query the job scheduler.
```

Managing your computers
-----------------------

> If you are unsure whether a computer is already set up, list configured computers with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fully configured computers can be listed with:
```

.. code-block:: console

   $ verdi computer list

> To get detailed information on the specific computer named ``COMPUTERNAME``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get detailed information on the specific computer named ``COMPUTERLABEL``:
```

.. code-block:: console

>    $ verdi computer show COMPUTERNAME

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   $ verdi computer show COMPUTERLABEL
```

To rename a computer or remove it from the database:

.. code-block:: console

>    $ verdi computer rename OLDCOMPUTERNAME NEWCOMPUTERNAME

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   $ verdi computer rename OLDCOMPUTERLABEL NEWCOMPUTERLABEL
```

>    $ verdi computer delete COMPUTERNAME

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   $ verdi computer delete COMPUTERLABEL
```

.. note::

   Before deleting a |Computer|, you will need to delete *all* nodes linked to it (e.g. any ``CalcJob`` and ``RemoteData`` nodes).
   Otherwise, AiiDA will prevent you from doing so in order to preserve provenance.

If a remote machine is under maintenance (or no longer operational), you may want to **disable** the corresponding |Computer|.
Doing so will prevent AiiDA from connecting to the given computer to check the state of calculations or to submit new calculations.

.. code-block:: console

>    $ verdi computer disable COMPUTERNAME
>    $ verdi computer enable COMPUTERNAME

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   $ verdi computer disable COMPUTERLABEL
   $ verdi computer enable COMPUTERLABEL
```

.. code-block:: bash

    module load intelmpi

At the end, you receive a confirmation, with the *PK* and the *UUID* of your new code.

.. admonition:: Using configuration files
    :class: tip title-icon-lightbulb

  Analogous to a :ref:`computer setup <how-to:run-codes:computer>`, some (or all) the information described above can be provided via a configuration file:

  .. code-block:: console

     $ verdi code setup --config code.yml

  where ``code.yml`` is a configuration file in the `YAML format <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML#Syntax>`_.

  This file contains the information in a series of key:value pairs:

  .. code-block:: yaml

      ---
      label: "qe-6.3-pw"
      description: "quantum_espresso v6.3"
      input_plugin: "quantumespresso.pw"
      on_computer: true
      remote_abs_path: "/path/to/code/pw.x"
      computer: "localhost"
      prepend_text: |
        module load module1
        module load module2
      append_text: " "

  The list of the keys for the ``yaml`` file is given by the available options of the ``code setup`` command:

  .. code-block:: console

    $ verdi code setup --help

>   Note: Remove the ``--`` prefix and replace ``-`` within the keys by the underscore ``_``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Note: remove the ``--`` prefix and replace ``-`` within the keys with an underscore ``_``.
```

Finally, to delete a code use:

.. code-block:: console

  $ verdi code delete <IDENTIFIER>

(only if it wasn't used by any calculation, otherwise an exception is raised).

.. note::

  Codes are a subclass of :py:class:`Node <aiida.orm.nodes.Node>` and, as such, you can attach ``extras`` to a code, for example:

  .. code-block:: python

      load_code('<IDENTIFIER>').set_extra('version', '6.1')
      load_code('<IDENTIFIER>').set_extra('family', 'cp2k')

  These can be useful for querying, for instance in order to find all runs done with the CP2K code of version 6.1 or later.

.. _how-to:run-codes:submit:

How to submit a calculation
===========================

After :ref:`setting up your computer <how-to:run-codes:computer>` and :ref:`setting up your code <how-to:run-codes:code:setup>`, you are ready to launch your calculations!

 * Make sure the daemon is running:

    .. code-block:: bash

        verdi daemon status

 * Figure out which inputs your |CalcJob|  plugin needs, e.g. using:

    .. code-block:: bash

        verdi plugin list aiida.calculations arithmetic.add

 * Write a ``submit.py`` script:

    .. code-block:: python

        from aiida.engine import submit

>         code = load_code(label='add@localhost')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        code = load_code('add@localhost')
```

  Use a standard terminal -- terminals embedded in some text editors (such as ``emacs``) have been known to cause problems.

.. _how-to:run-codes:computer:

How to set up a computer
========================

A |Computer| in AiiDA denotes a computational resource on which you will run your calculations.
It can either be:

 1. the machine where AiiDA is installed or
 2. any machine that is accessible via `SSH <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Shell>`_ from the machine where AiiDA is installed.

The second option allows managing multiple remote compute resources (including HPC clusters and cloud services) from the same AiiDA installation and moving computational jobs between them.

.. note::

    The second option requires access through an SSH keypair.
    If your compute resource demands two-factor authentication, you may need to install AiiDA directly on the compute resource instead.

Computer requirements
---------------------

Compute resources that can be used by AiiDA to run calculation come in two types:

1. The computer on which AiiDA itself is installed, i.e., the `localhost`

> 2. Remote computers that can be accessed over SSH (possibly :ref:`via a proxy server<how-to:ssh:proxy>`)

Reviewer 2: @chrisjsewell Can I suggest to simply merge this with the list above?
I.e. just move the parenthesis to line 34 and get rid of this list here.

Reviewer: Good point, I overlooked that list when I reviewed it.

Author: see cd5bda7cc2dda0ffbc0eef8f4dbad20c18325d2f

    Please ensure that your remote ``bash`` configuration does not load a different shell.

.. _how-to:run-codes:computer:setup:

Computer setup
--------------

The configuration of computers happens in two steps: setting up the public metadata associated with the |Computer| in AiiDA provenance graphs, and configuring private connection details.

Start by creating a new computer instance in the database:

.. code-block:: console

   $ verdi computer setup

At the end, the command will open your default editor on a file containing a summary of the configuration up to this point.
You can add ``bash`` commands that will be executed

 * *before* the actual execution of the job (under 'Pre-execution script'), and
 * *after* the script submission (under 'Post execution script').

Use these additional lines to perform any further set up of the environment on the computer, for example loading modules or exporting environment variables:

.. code-block:: bash

   export NEWVAR=1
   source some/file

.. note::

   Don't specify settings here that are specific to a code or calculation: you can set further pre-execution commands at the ``Code`` and even ``CalcJob`` level.

> When you are done editing, save and quit (e.g. ``<ESC>:wq<ENTER>`` in ``vim``).

Author: ```suggestion
When you are done editing, save and quit.
```
